## Trial registration

This pilot study was registered with ClinicalTrials.gov (reg. no
NCT05417243).

## Corresponding author

Martin Gerdin Wärnberg (MGW)

Department of Global Public Health  
Karolinska Institutet  
171 77 Stockholm  
Sweden

<martin.gerdin@ki.se>  
+46 708 53 95 98 (mobile)

## Authors

##### Johanna Berg (JB)

Department of Global Public Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Emergency Medicine, Department of Internal and Emergency Medicine, Skåne
University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.

##### Shamita Chatterjee (SC)

Department of Surgery, Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education and
Research, Kolkata, India.

##### Li Felländer-Tsai (LFT)

Division of Orthopaedics and Biotechnology, Department of Clinical
Science Intervention and Technology (CLINTEC), Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.

Department of Reconstructive Orthopedics, Karolinska University
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

##### Geeta Ghag (GG)

Department of Surgery, HBT Medical College And Dr. R N Cooper Municipal
General Hospital, Mumbai, India.

##### Monty Khajanchi (MK)

WHO Collaboration Centre for Research in Surgical Care Delivery in LMIC,
Mumbai, India.

Seth G. S. Medical College and K.E.M. Hospital, Mumbai, India.

##### Catherine Juillard (CJ)

Division of General Surgery, Department of Surgery, David Geffen School
of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

##### Nobhojit Roy (NR)

WHO Collaborating Center for Research on Surgical Care Delivery in
LMICs, BARC Hospital, HBNI University, Mumbai, India.

Department of Global Public Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.

##### Arun Prasad (AP)

Department of Surgery, Indraprastha Apollo Hospitals, New Delhi

##### Rajdeep Singh (RS)

Department of Surgery, Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi, India.

##### Kapil Dev Soni (KDS)

Critical and Intensive Care, JPN Apex Trauma Center, All India Institute
of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.

##### Lovisa Strömmer (LS)

Division of Surgery, Department of Clinical Science, Intervention and
Technology (CLINTEC), Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

Department of Surgery, Capio St Göran Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

##### Vipul Nandu

Department of Surgery, HBT Medical College And Dr. R N Cooper Municipal
General Hospital, Mumbai, India.

##### Debojit Basak

Project Research Scientist, Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education
and Research, Kolkata, India.

##### Tamal Khan

## Non-author contributors

Trauma life support Effectiveness Research Network (TERN) collaborators:

##### Prashant Bhandarkar (PB)

WHO collaboration Centre for Research in Surgical Care Delivery in LMIC,
Mumbai, India.

##### Anirban Chatterjee (AC)

Department of Orthopaedic Sciences, Medica Superspecialty Hospital,
Kolkata, India.

##### Chintamani (C)

Department of Surgery, Vardhman Mahavir Medical College and Safdarjung
Hospital, New Delhi, India.

##### Anita Gadgil (AG)

WHO collaboration Centre for Research in Surgical Care Delivery in LMIC,
Mumbai, India.

##### Marie Hasselberg (MH)

Department of Global Public Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.

##### Deepa Kizhakke Veetil (DKV)

Department of Surgery, Manipal Hospital, Dwarka, New Delhi.

##### Vineet Kumar (VK)

Department of Surgery, Lokmanya Tilak Municipal Medical College and
General Hospital, Mumbai, India.

##### Debabrata Kundu (DK)

Department of Surgery, Medical College Kolkata, Kolkata, India.

##### Anurag Mishra (AM)

Department of Surgery, Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi, India.

##### Priti Patil (PP)

WHO collaboration Centre for Research in Surgical Care Delivery in LMIC,
Mumbai, India.

##### Amit Roy (AR)

Department of Surgery, Sir Nil Ratan Sircar Medical College & Hospital,
Kolkata, India.

##### Siddarth David (SD)

Department of Global Public Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Doctors For You, Mumbai, India.

##### Harris Solomon (HS)

Department of Cultural Anthropology and the Duke Global Health
Institute, Duke University, Durham, USA.

##### Megha Tandon (MT)

Department of Surgery, Vardhman Mahavir Medical College and Safdarjung
Hospital, New Delhi, India.

## Keywords

Trauma management, Accident and emergency medicine, Education and
training.

<!--
## Word Count
4494
 -->

## Role of study sponsor and funders

The funding sources had no role in the design of this study nor during
its execution, analyses, interpretation of the data, or decision to
submit the results.

<!-- \newpage -->
<!-- Source main code to make global objects available in the text -->

# Abstract

**Introduction** Trauma life support training programmes aim to improve
trauma outcomes but there is no evidence from controlled trials to show
that they work. We conducted a pilot study to assess the feasibility of
conducting a cluster randomised controlled trial comparing the effect of
Advanced Trauma Life Support<sup>®</sup> (ATLS<sup>®</sup>) and Primary
Trauma Care (PTC) with standard care on patient outcomes. **Methods and
analysis** We piloted a pragmatic three-armed parallel, cluster
randomised, controlled trial in tertiary care hospitals across
metropolitan areas in India. We included adult trauma patients and
residents managing these patients. Two hospitals were randomised to
ATLS<sup>®</sup>, two to PTC, and three to standard care. The
feasibility outcomes were consent rate, lost to follow up rate, pass
rate, missing data rates, and differences in distribution between
observed and data extracted from medical records. We conducted community
consultations in parallel with the pilot trial. **Ethics and
dissemination** We obtained ethical approval from all participating
hospitals. **Results** Between April 2022 and February 2023 we included
376 patients and 21 residents. The percentage of patients who consented
to follow up was 77% and the percentage of residents who consented to
training was 100%. The lost to follow up rate was 14%. The pass rate was
100%. The missing data rate ranged from 0 to 98. Data collected through
observations were similar to data extracted from medical records, but
there was more missing data in the extracted data.
<!--22 (16%) patients died within 30 days in the standard care arm, 1 (3.8%) patients in the ATLS^®^ arm, and 3 (4.9%) patients in the PTC arm.-->
**Conclusions** Conducting a full-scale cluster randomised controlled
trial comparing the effects of ATLS<sup>®</sup>, PTC, and standard care
on patient outcomes should be feasible after incorporating key lessons
from this pilot.

<!--
# Article Summary

Strengths and limitations of this study:

- Cluster randomized controlled trial comparing the effect of ATLS^®^, PTC and standard care on patient and provider outcomes.
- Prospective data collection with direct observations by dedicated research officers.
- Participating centers' heterogeneity may affect the study estimates and bias the results.
-->
# Introduction

Trauma, defined as the clinical entity composed of physical injury and
the body’s associated response, causes 4.3 millions deaths every
year<sup>1</sup>. Several trauma life support training programs have
been developed to improve the early management of patients as they
arrive at hospital by providing a structured framework to assessment and
treatment<sup>2–4</sup>.

The proprietary Advanced Trauma Life Support<sup>®</sup>
(ATLS<sup>®</sup>) and the low-cost alternative Primary Trauma Care
(PTC) are the most established trauma life support training programmes
with physicians trained in over 80 countries<sup>5,6</sup>.
Observational studies indicate that these programmes may improve patient
outcomes<sup>7</sup>, but there is no high quality evidence from
controlled trials to support this<sup>2–4</sup>.

Several systematic reviews call for trials in settings where these
programmes are not routinely taught. We performed a pilot study to
assess the feasibility of conducting a cluster randomised controlled
trial comparing ATLS<sup>®</sup> and PTC with standard care, and to
estimate probable effect sizes and the intracluster correlation
coefficient needed for the sample size calculations of a full-scale
trial.

# Methods

## Trial Design

We piloted a three-armed cluster randomised controlled trial. The
protocol was published<sup>8</sup>. There were two intervention arms,
ATLS<sup>®</sup> and PTC training, and one standard care arm. We
collected data for four months in all three arms, first during a one
month observation phase and then during a three month intervention phase
(or continued observation in the standard care arm). This design allowed
us to assess outcomes both as final values and as change from baseline.

## Study Setting

We conducted this pilot in seven Indian tertiary hospitals, where
neither ATLS<sup>®</sup>, PTC, nor any other trauma life support
training program is routinely taught.

<!--
The trauma system is still developing, with
limited prehospital care, and the in hospital trauma mortality as well
as the proportion of preventable deaths remain high. Lack of standard
trauma training for healthcare providers, limited hospital resources,
inadequate processes of care, overcrowding emergency departments - are
some of the factors that contribute to the high mortality and
morbidity. During recent years efforts have been made to improve
hospital trauma care, through capacity building for trained trauma
care providers, augmenting facilities, and developing care protocols
within the hospitals. 
-->

## Eligibility Criteria for Cluster and Participants

### Clusters

We included Indian tertiary care hospitals that admitted more than 400
adult patients with trauma each year, with operation theatres, X-ray,
CT, and ultrasound facilities, and blood bank available around the
clock. Most surgical and emergency medicine departments in India
organise their physicians in units. Each unit typically consists of at
least three faculty members and three to twelve residents, and is
assigned a specific day of the week when they manage the emergency
department. We defined a cluster as one or more units of physicians
providing trauma care in the emergency department of Indian tertiary
care hospitals.

To be eligible, units had to have a maximum of 25% of the doctors
trained in either ATLS<sup>®</sup>, PTC, or similar training programs
before the start of the pilot study. Those residents who had received
training in the last five years were considered as trained. The figure
of 25% was decided through consensus in the research team, to balance
feasibility and contamination of results. The principal investigator at
each eligible hospital selected the units for training. We randomised on
the hospital level to avoid contamination between intervention arms and
the standard care arms.

### Patient Participants

Adults (15 years or older) who presented to the emergency department at
participating hospitals with a history of trauma when a designated unit
was on duty. History of trauma was defined as having any of the external
causes of morbidity and mortality listed in block V01-Y36, chapter XX of
the International Classification of Disease version 10 (ICD-10) codebook
as reason for presenting.

### Resident Doctor Participants

Resident doctors doing their speciality training in surgery or emergency
medicine managing trauma patients in the emergency department and who
were expected to remain in the participating hospitals for at least one
year from the time of the training. Consent was sought from the
residents in each of the intervention groups before they underwent the
ATLS<sup>®</sup> or PTC training.

## Intervention

In each intervention arm the residents in one or two units were trained
in either ATLS<sup>®</sup> or PTC. For the purpose of this pilot study,
our target was to train a minimum of 75% of residents in each unit. We
did not train the units’ faculty, because they are typically not
directly involved in the initial management of trauma patients. The
ATLS<sup>®</sup> training was conducted in an ATLS<sup>®</sup> certified
training centre in Mumbai, according to the standard ATLS<sup>®</sup>
curriculum<sup>5</sup>. The PTC training was conducted in New Delhi,
according to the standard PTC curriculum<sup>6</sup>. We did not modify
or adapt the delivery or content of these programs during this pilot
study.

### Standard Care

Standard care varies across hospitals in India, but trauma patients are
initially managed by casualty medical officers, surgical residents, or
emergency medicine residents. They are mainly first- or second-year
residents who resuscitate patients, perform interventions and refer
patients for imaging or other investigations. Compared with other
settings where a trauma team approach is adopted, nurses and other
healthcare professionals are only involved to a limited extent during
the initial management.

## Outcomes

Our pilot study included feasibility as well as participant outcomes.
The feasibility outcomes were: - Consent rate. For both patients and
residents this was equal to the percentage of participants who consented
to be included, out of the total number of eligible participants, over
the course of the pilot study. - Lost to follow up rate. This applied
only to patients and was equal to the percentage of patients that did
not complete 30 day follow up, out of all enrolled patients, over the
course of the pilot study. - Pass rate. This applied only to residents
in the intervention arms and equal the percentage of residents that
passed the training programme, out of the total number of trained
residents, over the course of the pilot study. - Missing data rate. This
applied to each outcome and variable and was equal to the proportion of
missing data, over the course of the pilot study. - Differences in
distributions of observed and extracted data. This applied to each
outcome and variable and compared the distributions of data collected by
observations versus extracted from hospital records.

The primary patient participant outcome was all cause mortality within
30 days from the time of arrival to the emergency department, measured
and compared across trial arms as both final values and as change from
baseline.
<!--The primary outcome and most secondary outcome were assessed and compared both as final values and as change from baseline. All outcomes that pertain to the individual participant level are detailed in Supplemental Material 1. We decided to include a large number of outcomes, including some more exploratory, so that we could test their feasibility and relevance. -->

## Participant Timeline and Inclusion

### Patients

Arriving patients were screened for eligibility and consented, if
conscious. Unconscious patients were consented by the patient’s
representative. This proxy consent was reaffirmed by the patient, on
regaining consciousness. We followed up patients at discharge, at 24
hours after arrival at the emergency department, and at 30 days after
arrival at the emergency department.

### Residents

Participating units were screened for eligibility once hospitals
confirmed their participation. All residents in these units were
approached to consent to training if their hospital was randomised to
either of the intervention arms. The training was conducted
approximately one month after the study started.

## Sample size

We did not conduct a formal power calculation for this pilot study, as
the primary aim was to assess feasibility. The time period was dictated
by budget and time constraints.

## Allocation

We used simple randomisation implemented using sealed envelopes to
allocate sites to trial arms.

## Blinding

It was not possible to blind investigators or participants to
interventions.

## Data Collection

Each participating hospital had a dedicated research officer who
collected the data for a total duration of four months. The research
officers collected data by observing the care delivered, interviewing
the participants, and by extracting data from hospital records. The
research officers collected data of all trauma patients who presented to
the participating units during their duty hours. Admitted patient
participants were followed up for complications and other in-hospital
outcome measures, for example length of stay. Patients who were not
admitted were followed up telephonically for mortality outcomes and
quality of life outcomes. The follow up period was 30 days.

## Variables

The research officers collected data on demographics, time of injury to
arrival at the participating hospital, time to recording vital signs,
vital signs, times to and management details including imaging and
surgery, and details of any injury sustained.
<!--Supplemental Material 2 contains a full variable list, with definitions.-->

## Patient and public involvement

We conducted community consultations to collect inputs from patients,
their caregivers, patient groups, and resident doctors to be used in the
selection of outcome measures and implementation of the full-scale
trial. The results of these consultations will be published separately.

<!--
## Data management
We used the online data collection tool KoboToolbox [@KoboToolbox], accessible only over a virtual private network (VPN), for each participating hospital to upload pseudonymised data to secure servers. Data validation techniques such as restricted values or values within a specific range were used to avoid ambiguous data entries and ensure the validity of the data. Ambiguous responses and errors were resolved after discussion with the core team during weekly meetings. An instruction manual or codebook for data variables was prepared to ensure consistency in data entry. This manual was referred to during the project data collection and variable descriptions were visible for each variable in the online data collection tool. Pseudonymised data were stored at the centralised server. The data were only accessible by the project's principal investigator or by delegation by the project principal investigator.
-->

## Data monitoring

Weekly meetings with the core team and research officers took place. We
conducted one interim analysis, and decided to complete the study as
participants were consenting to be included in the study and key
variables including mortality outcomes could be collected. We did not
use a data monitoring committee.

## Statistical Methods

We analysed all pilot data, including both feasibility and participant
outcomes, using descriptive statistics. We did not perform any formal
hypothesis tests during the analysis of this pilot’s data<sup>9</sup>.
Quantitative variables are summarised as mean +/- standard deviation,
median, interquartile range and range. Qualitative variables are
presented as absolute numbers and percentages. We used an empty
generalised linear mixed model <!-- see [@Sommet2017] --> to estimate
the intracluster correlation coefficient.

We compared patient participant outcomes in all possible combinations of
trial arms. In each combination we compared both differences in final
values and differences in change from baseline. For the intervention
arms the change from baseline was calculated as the difference between
the one month period of data collection before the training was
undertaken and the three month period after the training. For the
control arm the data collection period was four months and the
difference from baseline was calculated as the difference between the
first one month and the following three months.

Within each combination of trial arms we had planned to conduct subgroup
analyses of men, women, blunt multisystem trauma, penetrating trauma,
shock, severe traumatic brain injury, and elderly. These subgroups were
however too small to allow for meaningful analyses, and are therefore
reported descriptively only.

<!--We calculated both absolute and relative differences for each
comparison, along with 75, 85, and 95% confidence intervals. We used an empirical bootstrap procedure with 1000 draws to estimate these confidence intervals.-->

## Ethics and Dissemination

We were granted research ethics approval from each participating
hospital.

# Results

Between the study period of April 2022 to February 2023, we enrolled 376
trauma patients from 7 participating centres. The ATLS<sup>®</sup> arm
enrolled 44 patients, the PTC arm 130 patients, and the standard care
arm 202 patients. We trained a total of 21 residents, 6 in
ATLS<sup>®</sup>, and 15 in PTC.

The study flow diagram is shown in Figure @ref(fig:flow-diagram) and
patient sample characteristics across trial arms are shown in Table
@ref(tab:sample-characteristics). Overall, the number of females were 86
(23%), the median (IQR) age was 33 (24, 46) years, and the median ISS
(IQR) was 1 (0, 4). A total of 32 (9.9%) patients had the primary
outcome of mortality at 30 days after arrival to the emergency
department.

<img src="flow-diagram.png" alt="Study flow diagram. Abbreviations: ATLS, Advanced Trauma Life Support; PTC, Primary Trauma Care." width="1249" />
<p class="caption">
Study flow diagram. Abbreviations: ATLS, Advanced Trauma Life Support;
PTC, Primary Trauma Care.
</p>

<div id="uhkhaiemjr" style="padding-left:0px;padding-right:0px;padding-top:10px;padding-bottom:10px;overflow-x:auto;overflow-y:auto;width:auto;height:auto;">
<style>#uhkhaiemjr table {
  font-family: system-ui, 'Segoe UI', Roboto, Helvetica, Arial, sans-serif, 'Apple Color Emoji', 'Segoe UI Emoji', 'Segoe UI Symbol', 'Noto Color Emoji';
  -webkit-font-smoothing: antialiased;
  -moz-osx-font-smoothing: grayscale;
}

#uhkhaiemjr thead, #uhkhaiemjr tbody, #uhkhaiemjr tfoot, #uhkhaiemjr tr, #uhkhaiemjr td, #uhkhaiemjr th {
  border-style: none;
}

#uhkhaiemjr p {
  margin: 0;
  padding: 0;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_table {
  display: table;
  border-collapse: collapse;
  line-height: normal;
  margin-left: auto;
  margin-right: auto;
  color: #333333;
  font-size: 16px;
  font-weight: normal;
  font-style: normal;
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  width: auto;
  border-top-style: solid;
  border-top-width: 2px;
  border-top-color: #A8A8A8;
  border-right-style: none;
  border-right-width: 2px;
  border-right-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-bottom-style: solid;
  border-bottom-width: 2px;
  border-bottom-color: #A8A8A8;
  border-left-style: none;
  border-left-width: 2px;
  border-left-color: #D3D3D3;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_caption {
  padding-top: 4px;
  padding-bottom: 4px;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_title {
  color: #333333;
  font-size: 125%;
  font-weight: initial;
  padding-top: 4px;
  padding-bottom: 4px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
  border-bottom-color: #FFFFFF;
  border-bottom-width: 0;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_subtitle {
  color: #333333;
  font-size: 85%;
  font-weight: initial;
  padding-top: 3px;
  padding-bottom: 5px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
  border-top-color: #FFFFFF;
  border-top-width: 0;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_heading {
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  text-align: center;
  border-bottom-color: #FFFFFF;
  border-left-style: none;
  border-left-width: 1px;
  border-left-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-right-style: none;
  border-right-width: 1px;
  border-right-color: #D3D3D3;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_bottom_border {
  border-bottom-style: solid;
  border-bottom-width: 2px;
  border-bottom-color: #D3D3D3;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_col_headings {
  border-top-style: solid;
  border-top-width: 2px;
  border-top-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-bottom-style: solid;
  border-bottom-width: 2px;
  border-bottom-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-left-style: none;
  border-left-width: 1px;
  border-left-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-right-style: none;
  border-right-width: 1px;
  border-right-color: #D3D3D3;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_col_heading {
  color: #333333;
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  font-size: 100%;
  font-weight: normal;
  text-transform: inherit;
  border-left-style: none;
  border-left-width: 1px;
  border-left-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-right-style: none;
  border-right-width: 1px;
  border-right-color: #D3D3D3;
  vertical-align: bottom;
  padding-top: 5px;
  padding-bottom: 6px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
  overflow-x: hidden;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_column_spanner_outer {
  color: #333333;
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  font-size: 100%;
  font-weight: normal;
  text-transform: inherit;
  padding-top: 0;
  padding-bottom: 0;
  padding-left: 4px;
  padding-right: 4px;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_column_spanner_outer:first-child {
  padding-left: 0;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_column_spanner_outer:last-child {
  padding-right: 0;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_column_spanner {
  border-bottom-style: solid;
  border-bottom-width: 2px;
  border-bottom-color: #D3D3D3;
  vertical-align: bottom;
  padding-top: 5px;
  padding-bottom: 5px;
  overflow-x: hidden;
  display: inline-block;
  width: 100%;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_spanner_row {
  border-bottom-style: hidden;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_group_heading {
  padding-top: 8px;
  padding-bottom: 8px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
  color: #333333;
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  font-size: 100%;
  font-weight: initial;
  text-transform: inherit;
  border-top-style: solid;
  border-top-width: 2px;
  border-top-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-bottom-style: solid;
  border-bottom-width: 2px;
  border-bottom-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-left-style: none;
  border-left-width: 1px;
  border-left-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-right-style: none;
  border-right-width: 1px;
  border-right-color: #D3D3D3;
  vertical-align: middle;
  text-align: left;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_empty_group_heading {
  padding: 0.5px;
  color: #333333;
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  font-size: 100%;
  font-weight: initial;
  border-top-style: solid;
  border-top-width: 2px;
  border-top-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-bottom-style: solid;
  border-bottom-width: 2px;
  border-bottom-color: #D3D3D3;
  vertical-align: middle;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_from_md > :first-child {
  margin-top: 0;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_from_md > :last-child {
  margin-bottom: 0;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_row {
  padding-top: 8px;
  padding-bottom: 8px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
  margin: 10px;
  border-top-style: solid;
  border-top-width: 1px;
  border-top-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-left-style: none;
  border-left-width: 1px;
  border-left-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-right-style: none;
  border-right-width: 1px;
  border-right-color: #D3D3D3;
  vertical-align: middle;
  overflow-x: hidden;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_stub {
  color: #333333;
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  font-size: 100%;
  font-weight: initial;
  text-transform: inherit;
  border-right-style: solid;
  border-right-width: 2px;
  border-right-color: #D3D3D3;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_stub_row_group {
  color: #333333;
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  font-size: 100%;
  font-weight: initial;
  text-transform: inherit;
  border-right-style: solid;
  border-right-width: 2px;
  border-right-color: #D3D3D3;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
  vertical-align: top;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_row_group_first td {
  border-top-width: 2px;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_row_group_first th {
  border-top-width: 2px;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_summary_row {
  color: #333333;
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  text-transform: inherit;
  padding-top: 8px;
  padding-bottom: 8px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_first_summary_row {
  border-top-style: solid;
  border-top-color: #D3D3D3;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_first_summary_row.thick {
  border-top-width: 2px;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_last_summary_row {
  padding-top: 8px;
  padding-bottom: 8px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
  border-bottom-style: solid;
  border-bottom-width: 2px;
  border-bottom-color: #D3D3D3;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_grand_summary_row {
  color: #333333;
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  text-transform: inherit;
  padding-top: 8px;
  padding-bottom: 8px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_first_grand_summary_row {
  padding-top: 8px;
  padding-bottom: 8px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
  border-top-style: double;
  border-top-width: 6px;
  border-top-color: #D3D3D3;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_last_grand_summary_row_top {
  padding-top: 8px;
  padding-bottom: 8px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
  border-bottom-style: double;
  border-bottom-width: 6px;
  border-bottom-color: #D3D3D3;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_striped {
  background-color: rgba(128, 128, 128, 0.05);
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_table_body {
  border-top-style: solid;
  border-top-width: 2px;
  border-top-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-bottom-style: solid;
  border-bottom-width: 2px;
  border-bottom-color: #D3D3D3;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_footnotes {
  color: #333333;
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  border-bottom-style: none;
  border-bottom-width: 2px;
  border-bottom-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-left-style: none;
  border-left-width: 2px;
  border-left-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-right-style: none;
  border-right-width: 2px;
  border-right-color: #D3D3D3;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_footnote {
  margin: 0px;
  font-size: 90%;
  padding-top: 4px;
  padding-bottom: 4px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_sourcenotes {
  color: #333333;
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  border-bottom-style: none;
  border-bottom-width: 2px;
  border-bottom-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-left-style: none;
  border-left-width: 2px;
  border-left-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-right-style: none;
  border-right-width: 2px;
  border-right-color: #D3D3D3;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_sourcenote {
  font-size: 90%;
  padding-top: 4px;
  padding-bottom: 4px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_left {
  text-align: left;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_center {
  text-align: center;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_right {
  text-align: right;
  font-variant-numeric: tabular-nums;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_font_normal {
  font-weight: normal;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_font_bold {
  font-weight: bold;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_font_italic {
  font-style: italic;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_super {
  font-size: 65%;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_footnote_marks {
  font-size: 75%;
  vertical-align: 0.4em;
  position: initial;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_asterisk {
  font-size: 100%;
  vertical-align: 0;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_indent_1 {
  text-indent: 5px;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_indent_2 {
  text-indent: 10px;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_indent_3 {
  text-indent: 15px;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_indent_4 {
  text-indent: 20px;
}

#uhkhaiemjr .gt_indent_5 {
  text-indent: 25px;
}
</style>
<table class="gt_table" data-quarto-disable-processing="false" data-quarto-bootstrap="false">
  <caption>Patient sample characteristics</caption>
  <thead>
    
    <tr class="gt_col_headings gt_spanner_row">
      <th class="gt_col_heading gt_columns_bottom_border gt_left" rowspan="2" colspan="1" scope="col" id="&lt;strong&gt;Characteristic&lt;/strong&gt;"><strong>Characteristic</strong></th>
      <th class="gt_center gt_columns_top_border gt_column_spanner_outer" rowspan="1" colspan="4" scope="colgroup" id="Before training">
        <span class="gt_column_spanner">Before training</span>
      </th>
      <th class="gt_center gt_columns_top_border gt_column_spanner_outer" rowspan="1" colspan="4" scope="colgroup" id="After training">
        <span class="gt_column_spanner">After training</span>
      </th>
      <th class="gt_center gt_columns_top_border gt_column_spanner_outer" rowspan="1" colspan="1" scope="col" id="Overall">
        <span class="gt_column_spanner">Overall</span>
      </th>
    </tr>
    <tr class="gt_col_headings">
      <th class="gt_col_heading gt_columns_bottom_border gt_center" rowspan="1" colspan="1" scope="col" id="&lt;strong&gt;ATLS&lt;/strong&gt;, N = 16&lt;span class=&quot;gt_footnote_marks&quot; style=&quot;white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;&quot;&gt;&lt;sup&gt;1&lt;/sup&gt;&lt;/span&gt;"><strong>ATLS</strong>, N = 16<span class="gt_footnote_marks" style="white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;"><sup>1</sup></span></th>
      <th class="gt_col_heading gt_columns_bottom_border gt_center" rowspan="1" colspan="1" scope="col" id="&lt;strong&gt;PTC&lt;/strong&gt;, N = 57&lt;span class=&quot;gt_footnote_marks&quot; style=&quot;white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;&quot;&gt;&lt;sup&gt;1&lt;/sup&gt;&lt;/span&gt;"><strong>PTC</strong>, N = 57<span class="gt_footnote_marks" style="white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;"><sup>1</sup></span></th>
      <th class="gt_col_heading gt_columns_bottom_border gt_center" rowspan="1" colspan="1" scope="col" id="&lt;strong&gt;Standard care&lt;/strong&gt;, N = 41&lt;span class=&quot;gt_footnote_marks&quot; style=&quot;white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;&quot;&gt;&lt;sup&gt;1&lt;/sup&gt;&lt;/span&gt;"><strong>Standard care</strong>, N = 41<span class="gt_footnote_marks" style="white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;"><sup>1</sup></span></th>
      <th class="gt_col_heading gt_columns_bottom_border gt_center" rowspan="1" colspan="1" scope="col" id="&lt;strong&gt;Overall&lt;/strong&gt;, N = 114&lt;span class=&quot;gt_footnote_marks&quot; style=&quot;white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;&quot;&gt;&lt;sup&gt;1&lt;/sup&gt;&lt;/span&gt;"><strong>Overall</strong>, N = 114<span class="gt_footnote_marks" style="white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;"><sup>1</sup></span></th>
      <th class="gt_col_heading gt_columns_bottom_border gt_center" rowspan="1" colspan="1" scope="col" id="&lt;strong&gt;ATLS&lt;/strong&gt;, N = 28&lt;span class=&quot;gt_footnote_marks&quot; style=&quot;white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;&quot;&gt;&lt;sup&gt;1&lt;/sup&gt;&lt;/span&gt;"><strong>ATLS</strong>, N = 28<span class="gt_footnote_marks" style="white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;"><sup>1</sup></span></th>
      <th class="gt_col_heading gt_columns_bottom_border gt_center" rowspan="1" colspan="1" scope="col" id="&lt;strong&gt;PTC&lt;/strong&gt;, N = 73&lt;span class=&quot;gt_footnote_marks&quot; style=&quot;white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;&quot;&gt;&lt;sup&gt;1&lt;/sup&gt;&lt;/span&gt;"><strong>PTC</strong>, N = 73<span class="gt_footnote_marks" style="white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;"><sup>1</sup></span></th>
      <th class="gt_col_heading gt_columns_bottom_border gt_center" rowspan="1" colspan="1" scope="col" id="&lt;strong&gt;Standard care&lt;/strong&gt;, N = 161&lt;span class=&quot;gt_footnote_marks&quot; style=&quot;white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;&quot;&gt;&lt;sup&gt;1&lt;/sup&gt;&lt;/span&gt;"><strong>Standard care</strong>, N = 161<span class="gt_footnote_marks" style="white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;"><sup>1</sup></span></th>
      <th class="gt_col_heading gt_columns_bottom_border gt_center" rowspan="1" colspan="1" scope="col" id="&lt;strong&gt;Overall&lt;/strong&gt;, N = 262&lt;span class=&quot;gt_footnote_marks&quot; style=&quot;white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;&quot;&gt;&lt;sup&gt;1&lt;/sup&gt;&lt;/span&gt;"><strong>Overall</strong>, N = 262<span class="gt_footnote_marks" style="white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;"><sup>1</sup></span></th>
      <th class="gt_col_heading gt_columns_bottom_border gt_center" rowspan="1" colspan="1" scope="col" id="&lt;strong&gt;N = 376&lt;/strong&gt;&lt;span class=&quot;gt_footnote_marks&quot; style=&quot;white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;&quot;&gt;&lt;sup&gt;1&lt;/sup&gt;&lt;/span&gt;"><strong>N = 376</strong><span class="gt_footnote_marks" style="white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;"><sup>1</sup></span></th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody class="gt_table_body">
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">Age, years</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">46 (31, 61)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">30 (22, 38)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">32 (23, 46)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">33 (23, 46)</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">37 (30, 55)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">30 (22, 38)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">35 (26, 47)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">34 (25, 45)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">33 (24, 46)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">Elderly</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">3 (19%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">3 (5.3%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">3 (7.3%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">9 (7.9%)</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">3 (11%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">2 (2.7%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">12 (7.5%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">17 (6.5%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">26 (6.9%)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">Sex</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center"></td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Male</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">10 (63%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">44 (77%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">36 (88%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">90 (79%)</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">23 (82%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">53 (73%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">124 (77%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">200 (76%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">290 (77%)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Female</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">6 (38%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">13 (23%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">5 (12%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">24 (21%)</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">5 (18%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">20 (27%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">37 (23%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">62 (24%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">86 (23%)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Other</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Unknown</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">Dominating injury type</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center"></td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Penetrating</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">2 (13%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">3 (7.3%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">5 (4.4%)</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">1 (3.6%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">1 (1.4%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">10 (6.2%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">12 (4.6%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">17 (4.5%)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Blunt</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">14 (88%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">57 (100%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">38 (93%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">109 (96%)</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">27 (96%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">72 (99%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">151 (94%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">250 (95%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">359 (95%)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">Blunt multisystem trauma</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">1 (6.3%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">3 (5.3%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">4 (3.5%)</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">1 (3.6%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">3 (4.1%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">2 (1.2%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">6 (2.3%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">10 (2.7%)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">Severe traumatic brain injury</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">3 (5.3%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">4 (9.8%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">7 (6.1%)</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">1 (3.6%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">2 (2.7%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">7 (4.3%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">10 (3.8%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">17 (4.5%)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">Shock</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">1 (6.7%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">1 (0.9%)</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">1 (3.8%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">4 (5.7%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">4 (2.5%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">9 (3.6%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">10 (2.8%)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Missing</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">1</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">1</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">3</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">5</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">2</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">3</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">4</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">9</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">14</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">Respiratory rate, breaths per minute</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">21.5 (20.0, 24.0)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">21.0 (19.0, 23.0)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">20.0 (18.0, 21.0)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">20.0 (18.0, 22.0)</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">21.0 (19.5, 23.3)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">22.0 (20.0, 25.0)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">20.0 (18.0, 22.0)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">21.0 (19.0, 23.0)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">20.0 (19.0, 23.0)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Missing</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">3</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">4</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">7</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">0</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">2</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">3</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">5</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">12</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">Oxygen saturation, %</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">98.00 (96.00, 99.00)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">98.00 (97.00, 98.00)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">98.00 (97.75, 99.00)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">98.00 (97.00, 99.00)</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">98.00 (97.00, 98.25)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">98.00 (98.00, 99.00)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">98.00 (97.00, 99.00)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">98.00 (98.00, 99.00)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">98.00 (97.00, 99.00)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Missing</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">1</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">1</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">2</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">2</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">Heart rate, beats per minute</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">94 (76, 104)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">90 (79, 104)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">86 (80, 96)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">88 (80, 100)</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">86 (75, 94)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">90 (74, 105)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">85 (80, 95)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">86 (78, 100)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">86 (78, 100)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Missing</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">1</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">1</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">2</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">1</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">0</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">0</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">1</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">3</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">Systolic blood pressure, mmHg</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">128 (113, 149)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">123 (115, 136)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">126 (117, 130)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">124 (115, 133)</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">124 (113, 130)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">120 (110, 136)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">123 (112, 136)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">123 (111, 136)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">123 (112, 135)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Missing</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">1</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">1</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">3</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">5</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">2</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">3</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">4</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">9</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">14</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">Glasgow Coma Scale</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">15.00 (15.00, 15.00)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">15.00 (15.00, 15.00)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">15.00 (15.00, 15.00)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">15.00 (15.00, 15.00)</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">15.0 (15.0, 15.0)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">15.0 (15.0, 15.0)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">15.0 (15.0, 15.0)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">15.0 (15.0, 15.0)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">15.0 (15.0, 15.0)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Missing</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">1</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">1</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">0</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">0</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">1</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">1</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">2</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">Injury Severity Score</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">3 (1, 10)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">4 (0, 9)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">1 (0, 4)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">2 (0, 5)</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">2 (1, 4)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">2 (1, 4)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">1 (0, 5)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">1 (0, 4)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">1 (0, 4)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">In-hospital mortality</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">4 (7.0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">2 (4.9%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">6 (5.3%)</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">1 (3.7%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">3 (4.1%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">19 (12%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">23 (8.9%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">29 (7.8%)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Missing</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">1</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">0</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">2</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">3</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">3</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">30 day mortality</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0 (0%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">5 (10%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">1 (2.6%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">6 (5.9%)</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">1 (3.8%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">3 (4.9%)</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">22 (16%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">26 (12%)</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">32 (9.9%)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Missing</td>
<td headers="stat_1_1" class="gt_row gt_center">2</td>
<td headers="stat_2_1" class="gt_row gt_center">8</td>
<td headers="stat_3_1" class="gt_row gt_center">3</td>
<td headers="stat_0_1" class="gt_row gt_center">13</td>
<td headers="stat_1_2" class="gt_row gt_center">2</td>
<td headers="stat_2_2" class="gt_row gt_center">12</td>
<td headers="stat_3_2" class="gt_row gt_center">26</td>
<td headers="stat_0_2" class="gt_row gt_center">40</td>
<td headers="stat_0_3" class="gt_row gt_center">53</td></tr>
  </tbody>
  
  <tfoot class="gt_footnotes">
    <tr>
      <td class="gt_footnote" colspan="10"><span class="gt_footnote_marks" style="white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;"><sup>1</sup></span> Median (IQR); n (%)</td>
    </tr>
  </tfoot>
</table>
</div>

## Feasibility Outcomes

<!--Out of X potentially eligible patients, X (X%) patients were enrolled
in the study-->

. The percentage of patients who consented to follow up was 77% and the
percentage of residents who consented to training was 100%. The lost to
follow up rate was 14%. The pass rate was 100%. The missing data rate
ranged from 0 to 98, with details for selected variables shown in Table
(tab:sample-characteristics). The differences in distributions between
observed and extracted data, for selected variables that were collected
through observation or interview, are shown in Table
(tab:observed-vs-retrospective). Overall, the data were similarly
distributed, but there were considerably more missing values in
extracted data compared to observed data.

<div id="ukhkvwmmjx" style="padding-left:0px;padding-right:0px;padding-top:10px;padding-bottom:10px;overflow-x:auto;overflow-y:auto;width:auto;height:auto;">
<style>#ukhkvwmmjx table {
  font-family: system-ui, 'Segoe UI', Roboto, Helvetica, Arial, sans-serif, 'Apple Color Emoji', 'Segoe UI Emoji', 'Segoe UI Symbol', 'Noto Color Emoji';
  -webkit-font-smoothing: antialiased;
  -moz-osx-font-smoothing: grayscale;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx thead, #ukhkvwmmjx tbody, #ukhkvwmmjx tfoot, #ukhkvwmmjx tr, #ukhkvwmmjx td, #ukhkvwmmjx th {
  border-style: none;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx p {
  margin: 0;
  padding: 0;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_table {
  display: table;
  border-collapse: collapse;
  line-height: normal;
  margin-left: auto;
  margin-right: auto;
  color: #333333;
  font-size: 16px;
  font-weight: normal;
  font-style: normal;
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  width: auto;
  border-top-style: solid;
  border-top-width: 2px;
  border-top-color: #A8A8A8;
  border-right-style: none;
  border-right-width: 2px;
  border-right-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-bottom-style: solid;
  border-bottom-width: 2px;
  border-bottom-color: #A8A8A8;
  border-left-style: none;
  border-left-width: 2px;
  border-left-color: #D3D3D3;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_caption {
  padding-top: 4px;
  padding-bottom: 4px;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_title {
  color: #333333;
  font-size: 125%;
  font-weight: initial;
  padding-top: 4px;
  padding-bottom: 4px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
  border-bottom-color: #FFFFFF;
  border-bottom-width: 0;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_subtitle {
  color: #333333;
  font-size: 85%;
  font-weight: initial;
  padding-top: 3px;
  padding-bottom: 5px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
  border-top-color: #FFFFFF;
  border-top-width: 0;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_heading {
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  text-align: center;
  border-bottom-color: #FFFFFF;
  border-left-style: none;
  border-left-width: 1px;
  border-left-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-right-style: none;
  border-right-width: 1px;
  border-right-color: #D3D3D3;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_bottom_border {
  border-bottom-style: solid;
  border-bottom-width: 2px;
  border-bottom-color: #D3D3D3;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_col_headings {
  border-top-style: solid;
  border-top-width: 2px;
  border-top-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-bottom-style: solid;
  border-bottom-width: 2px;
  border-bottom-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-left-style: none;
  border-left-width: 1px;
  border-left-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-right-style: none;
  border-right-width: 1px;
  border-right-color: #D3D3D3;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_col_heading {
  color: #333333;
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  font-size: 100%;
  font-weight: normal;
  text-transform: inherit;
  border-left-style: none;
  border-left-width: 1px;
  border-left-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-right-style: none;
  border-right-width: 1px;
  border-right-color: #D3D3D3;
  vertical-align: bottom;
  padding-top: 5px;
  padding-bottom: 6px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
  overflow-x: hidden;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_column_spanner_outer {
  color: #333333;
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  font-size: 100%;
  font-weight: normal;
  text-transform: inherit;
  padding-top: 0;
  padding-bottom: 0;
  padding-left: 4px;
  padding-right: 4px;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_column_spanner_outer:first-child {
  padding-left: 0;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_column_spanner_outer:last-child {
  padding-right: 0;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_column_spanner {
  border-bottom-style: solid;
  border-bottom-width: 2px;
  border-bottom-color: #D3D3D3;
  vertical-align: bottom;
  padding-top: 5px;
  padding-bottom: 5px;
  overflow-x: hidden;
  display: inline-block;
  width: 100%;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_spanner_row {
  border-bottom-style: hidden;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_group_heading {
  padding-top: 8px;
  padding-bottom: 8px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
  color: #333333;
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  font-size: 100%;
  font-weight: initial;
  text-transform: inherit;
  border-top-style: solid;
  border-top-width: 2px;
  border-top-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-bottom-style: solid;
  border-bottom-width: 2px;
  border-bottom-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-left-style: none;
  border-left-width: 1px;
  border-left-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-right-style: none;
  border-right-width: 1px;
  border-right-color: #D3D3D3;
  vertical-align: middle;
  text-align: left;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_empty_group_heading {
  padding: 0.5px;
  color: #333333;
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  font-size: 100%;
  font-weight: initial;
  border-top-style: solid;
  border-top-width: 2px;
  border-top-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-bottom-style: solid;
  border-bottom-width: 2px;
  border-bottom-color: #D3D3D3;
  vertical-align: middle;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_from_md > :first-child {
  margin-top: 0;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_from_md > :last-child {
  margin-bottom: 0;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_row {
  padding-top: 8px;
  padding-bottom: 8px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
  margin: 10px;
  border-top-style: solid;
  border-top-width: 1px;
  border-top-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-left-style: none;
  border-left-width: 1px;
  border-left-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-right-style: none;
  border-right-width: 1px;
  border-right-color: #D3D3D3;
  vertical-align: middle;
  overflow-x: hidden;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_stub {
  color: #333333;
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  font-size: 100%;
  font-weight: initial;
  text-transform: inherit;
  border-right-style: solid;
  border-right-width: 2px;
  border-right-color: #D3D3D3;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_stub_row_group {
  color: #333333;
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  font-size: 100%;
  font-weight: initial;
  text-transform: inherit;
  border-right-style: solid;
  border-right-width: 2px;
  border-right-color: #D3D3D3;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
  vertical-align: top;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_row_group_first td {
  border-top-width: 2px;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_row_group_first th {
  border-top-width: 2px;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_summary_row {
  color: #333333;
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  text-transform: inherit;
  padding-top: 8px;
  padding-bottom: 8px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_first_summary_row {
  border-top-style: solid;
  border-top-color: #D3D3D3;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_first_summary_row.thick {
  border-top-width: 2px;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_last_summary_row {
  padding-top: 8px;
  padding-bottom: 8px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
  border-bottom-style: solid;
  border-bottom-width: 2px;
  border-bottom-color: #D3D3D3;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_grand_summary_row {
  color: #333333;
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  text-transform: inherit;
  padding-top: 8px;
  padding-bottom: 8px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_first_grand_summary_row {
  padding-top: 8px;
  padding-bottom: 8px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
  border-top-style: double;
  border-top-width: 6px;
  border-top-color: #D3D3D3;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_last_grand_summary_row_top {
  padding-top: 8px;
  padding-bottom: 8px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
  border-bottom-style: double;
  border-bottom-width: 6px;
  border-bottom-color: #D3D3D3;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_striped {
  background-color: rgba(128, 128, 128, 0.05);
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_table_body {
  border-top-style: solid;
  border-top-width: 2px;
  border-top-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-bottom-style: solid;
  border-bottom-width: 2px;
  border-bottom-color: #D3D3D3;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_footnotes {
  color: #333333;
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  border-bottom-style: none;
  border-bottom-width: 2px;
  border-bottom-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-left-style: none;
  border-left-width: 2px;
  border-left-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-right-style: none;
  border-right-width: 2px;
  border-right-color: #D3D3D3;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_footnote {
  margin: 0px;
  font-size: 90%;
  padding-top: 4px;
  padding-bottom: 4px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_sourcenotes {
  color: #333333;
  background-color: #FFFFFF;
  border-bottom-style: none;
  border-bottom-width: 2px;
  border-bottom-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-left-style: none;
  border-left-width: 2px;
  border-left-color: #D3D3D3;
  border-right-style: none;
  border-right-width: 2px;
  border-right-color: #D3D3D3;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_sourcenote {
  font-size: 90%;
  padding-top: 4px;
  padding-bottom: 4px;
  padding-left: 5px;
  padding-right: 5px;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_left {
  text-align: left;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_center {
  text-align: center;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_right {
  text-align: right;
  font-variant-numeric: tabular-nums;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_font_normal {
  font-weight: normal;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_font_bold {
  font-weight: bold;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_font_italic {
  font-style: italic;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_super {
  font-size: 65%;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_footnote_marks {
  font-size: 75%;
  vertical-align: 0.4em;
  position: initial;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_asterisk {
  font-size: 100%;
  vertical-align: 0;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_indent_1 {
  text-indent: 5px;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_indent_2 {
  text-indent: 10px;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_indent_3 {
  text-indent: 15px;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_indent_4 {
  text-indent: 20px;
}

#ukhkvwmmjx .gt_indent_5 {
  text-indent: 25px;
}
</style>
<table class="gt_table" data-quarto-disable-processing="false" data-quarto-bootstrap="false">
  <caption>Differences in distributions between observed and extracted data, for selected variables that were collected through observation or interview.</caption>
  <thead>
    
    <tr class="gt_col_headings">
      <th class="gt_col_heading gt_columns_bottom_border gt_left" rowspan="1" colspan="1" scope="col" id="&lt;strong&gt;Characteristic&lt;/strong&gt;"><strong>Characteristic</strong></th>
      <th class="gt_col_heading gt_columns_bottom_border gt_center" rowspan="1" colspan="1" scope="col" id="&lt;strong&gt;Directly observed&lt;/strong&gt;, N = 55&lt;span class=&quot;gt_footnote_marks&quot; style=&quot;white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;&quot;&gt;&lt;sup&gt;1&lt;/sup&gt;&lt;/span&gt;"><strong>Directly observed</strong>, N = 55<span class="gt_footnote_marks" style="white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;"><sup>1</sup></span></th>
      <th class="gt_col_heading gt_columns_bottom_border gt_center" rowspan="1" colspan="1" scope="col" id="&lt;strong&gt;Retrospective&lt;/strong&gt;, N = 55&lt;span class=&quot;gt_footnote_marks&quot; style=&quot;white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;&quot;&gt;&lt;sup&gt;1&lt;/sup&gt;&lt;/span&gt;"><strong>Retrospective</strong>, N = 55<span class="gt_footnote_marks" style="white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;"><sup>1</sup></span></th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody class="gt_table_body">
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">Age, years</td>
<td headers="stat_1" class="gt_row gt_center">34 (29, 48)</td>
<td headers="stat_2" class="gt_row gt_center">34 (24, 50)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Missing</td>
<td headers="stat_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0</td>
<td headers="stat_2" class="gt_row gt_center">21</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">Sex</td>
<td headers="stat_1" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_2" class="gt_row gt_center"></td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Female</td>
<td headers="stat_1" class="gt_row gt_center">10 (18%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2" class="gt_row gt_center">6 (18%)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Male</td>
<td headers="stat_1" class="gt_row gt_center">45 (82%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2" class="gt_row gt_center">27 (82%)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Missing</td>
<td headers="stat_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0</td>
<td headers="stat_2" class="gt_row gt_center">22</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">Dominating injury type</td>
<td headers="stat_1" class="gt_row gt_center"></td>
<td headers="stat_2" class="gt_row gt_center"></td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Blunt</td>
<td headers="stat_1" class="gt_row gt_center">52 (95%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2" class="gt_row gt_center">29 (91%)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Penetrating</td>
<td headers="stat_1" class="gt_row gt_center">3 (5.5%)</td>
<td headers="stat_2" class="gt_row gt_center">3 (9.4%)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Missing</td>
<td headers="stat_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0</td>
<td headers="stat_2" class="gt_row gt_center">23</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">Respiratory rate, breaths per minute</td>
<td headers="stat_1" class="gt_row gt_center">21.0 (18.0, 23.5)</td>
<td headers="stat_2" class="gt_row gt_center">18.0 (16.0, 20.0)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Missing</td>
<td headers="stat_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0</td>
<td headers="stat_2" class="gt_row gt_center">37</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">Oxygen saturation, %</td>
<td headers="stat_1" class="gt_row gt_center">98.00 (98.00, 99.00)</td>
<td headers="stat_2" class="gt_row gt_center">98.00 (97.25, 99.75)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Missing</td>
<td headers="stat_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0</td>
<td headers="stat_2" class="gt_row gt_center">29</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">Heart rate, beats per minute</td>
<td headers="stat_1" class="gt_row gt_center">85 (80, 98)</td>
<td headers="stat_2" class="gt_row gt_center">87 (84, 93)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Missing</td>
<td headers="stat_1" class="gt_row gt_center">0</td>
<td headers="stat_2" class="gt_row gt_center">19</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">Systolic blood pressure, mmHg</td>
<td headers="stat_1" class="gt_row gt_center">123 (112, 136)</td>
<td headers="stat_2" class="gt_row gt_center">118 (110, 128)</td></tr>
    <tr><td headers="label" class="gt_row gt_left">    Missing</td>
<td headers="stat_1" class="gt_row gt_center">1</td>
<td headers="stat_2" class="gt_row gt_center">18</td></tr>
  </tbody>
  
  <tfoot class="gt_footnotes">
    <tr>
      <td class="gt_footnote" colspan="3"><span class="gt_footnote_marks" style="white-space:nowrap;font-style:italic;font-weight:normal;"><sup>1</sup></span> Median (IQR); n (%)</td>
    </tr>
  </tfoot>
</table>
</div>

## Patient Participant Outcomes

After training, a total of 22 (16%) patients in the standard care arm
had the primary outcome, compared to 1 (3.8%) patients in the
ATLS<sup>®</sup> arm and 3 (4.9%) patients in the PTC arm. The absolute
change from baseline in the primary outcome (95% CI) in the standard
care arm was 13.4 (3, 20)% units, in the ATLS<sup>®</sup> arm 3.8 (0,
20.98)% units, and in the PTC arm -5.1 (-16.57, 4.76)% units. The
relative change from baseline in the primary outcome (95% CI) in the
standard care arm was 6.15 (2.62, 10.91), in the ATLS<sup>®</sup> arm ,
and in the PTC arm 0.49 (0, 2.31).

The absolute risk difference between the standard care and
ATLS<sup>®</sup> arms (95% CI) was 12.2 (-8.05, 23.3)% units, between
the standard care and PTC arms (95% CI) 11.1 (-5.3, 22.33)% units, and
between the ATLS<sup>®</sup> and PTC arms (95% CI) -1.1 (-22, 11.22)%
units. The relative risk in the standard care arm compared with the
ATLS<sup>®</sup> arm (95% CI) was 4.21 (1.36, 15.71), in the standard
care arm compared with the PTC arm (95% CI) 3.27 (0.61, 18.82), and in
the ATLS<sup>®</sup> arm compared with the PTC arm (95% CI) the relative
risk was 0.78 (0, 4.44).
<!--The absolute and relative differences in changes from baseline comparing the three arms are shown in Supplementary materials, along with data on all secondary outcomes.-->

## Resident Participant Outcomes

A total of 21 residents were trained during this pilot study. Overall
their median confidence in managing trauma patients was 10 (IQR 10-10)
on a 10 point Likert scale with 10 being most confident, across trial
arms and both before and after training.

# Discussion

We show that conducting a cluster randomized controlled trial comparing
ATLS<sup>®</sup> with PTC and standard care is feasible in this setting.
Missing data were low for key variables, including the primary outcome
and many secondary outcomes. Some variables had very high missing data
rates and may not be feasible to include in a full-scale trial.

<!-- Should we include dependency at discharge, for example using the
Modified Oxford Handicap Scale used in @Roberts2013?-->

We found that the ATLS<sup>®</sup> arm had lower 30-day mortality
compared to the PTC and standard care arms. We also found that the PTC
arm had lower mortality than the standard care arm. These findings
indicate a large potential effect of training physicians in trauma life
support, but it is important to note that this pilot study was not
powered to detect any differences in outcomes. The arms differed
considerably in sample size, with the ATLS<sup>®</sup> arm having the
smallest sample size. This difference resulted from the randomisation
process with a small number of heterogeneous clusters.

The primary patient participant outcome, all-cause 30-day mortality, was
missing in 14% of patients. This may appear high, especially compared to
for example the CRASH-2 and REACT-2 trials, which report missing primary
outcome in less than 0.01% of patients<sup>10,11</sup>. Like many other
trauma trials, both CRASH-2 and REACT-2 used in-hospital mortality as
their primary outcome measure, whereas we attempted to follow up
patients after discharge. Our missing data rate for in-hospital
mortality was only 1%, comparable to previous trials.

<!-- Consider discussing non-inferiority vs superiority. -->

During the course of this pilot we deviated from the protocol in
multiple ways, and provide a detailed list as Supplementary material.
Some key limitations of this pilot and therefore lessons to be learned
and factored into the design of the full-scale trial include the lower
than expected enrolment rates of some centres, centre specific
management routines, and difficulties in collecting data on
complications and cause of death. We minimised the impact of the lower
than expected enrolment rates by including a seventh centre, but on-site
observations of patient volumes are likely to be needed for the
full-scale trial. We decided to be pragmatic in selecting which
residents to train and how to structure the data collection depending on
how and by whom patients were initially managed, but this flexibility
will need to be built into the full-scale trial protocol. Finally, we
found that data on complications and cause of death were hard to
identify and therefore the full-scale trial will need to include longer
training of research officers.

<!-- Consider discussing waiver of informed consent for initial 
data collection -->

Previous studies on the effect of in-hospital trauma life support
training on patient outcomes are observational or quasi-experimental
without a control group, with heterogeneous results<sup>12–16</sup>.
Studies from Trinidad and Tobago, El Salvador, Rwanda, and Cambodia
found no significant effect on patient mortality after implementing
in-hospital trauma life support training<sup>12–15</sup>, whereas one
study from China that included 820 patients found a significant
reduction in mortality, from 20 to 15%, after implementing
ATLS<sup>®</sup><sup>16</sup>.

Several controlled trials, including at least two randomized controlled
trials<sup>17,18</sup>, show that ATLS<sup>®</sup> is associated with
improved provider skills<sup>2</sup>. Observational evidence indicates
that PTC also leads to improved provider skills<sup>4</sup>. The missing
link is then how, and if, these improved skills translate into improved
patient outcomes. As trauma care providers we assume, and probably
rightly so, that we deliver better care if we train. The question is
then how we should train, especially considering the costs associated
with some of the programs offered.

We conclude that a full-scale cluster randomised trial should be
feasible after incorporating the lessons of this pilot, and that this
full-scale trial should, regardless of its outcome, influence how we
train trauma care providers in the future.

# Contributorship statement

<!--
MGW conceived of the study. AG, AM, CJ, DKV, HS, JB, KDS, LFT, LS, MH,
MGW, MK, NR, PB, PP, RS, SD, and VK contributed to the design of the
study. DKV, KDS, MK, and MGW drafted the first version of the
protocol. AG, HS, and SD drafted the first version of the patient and
public involvement activities. JB and PP drafted the first versions of
the data management sections and wrote the data management plan. PB
and PP drafted the first versions of the statistical analysis
section. AG, AM, CJ, DKV, HS, JB, KDS, LFT, LS, MH, MGW, MK, NR, PB,
PP, RS, SC, SD, and VK contributed to the refinement of the
protocol. AR, AC, C, DK, GG, MK, MT, and VK are representatives of
prospective participating hospitals.
-->

# Competing Interests

Several authors are ATLS<sup>®</sup> and/or PTC instructors.

# Funding

Doctors for You through grants awarded to Karolinska Institutet by the
Swedish Research Council (grant number 2020-03779) and the Laerdal
Foundation (grant number 2021-0048).

# Data Sharing Statement

The final anonymized dataset and code for analysis are released
publicly.

# Protocol Deviations

## Trial Registration

We intended to also register our trial with Clinical Trials Registry -
India but because of time constrains we had to initiate the study before
registration was finalised, and Clinical Trials Registry - India only
allow prospective registration.

## Outcomes across subgroups

Because of small numbers in the pre-specified subgroups we decided to
report only descriptive data on these subgroups.

## Number of Participating Centres

We ended up recruiting seven centres instead of six and therefore
assigned two centres each to the intervention arms and three centres to
the control arm.

## Resident Participants

Emergency medicine in addition to surgery.

## Periodic suverys to residents

We did not distribute periodic surveys to the participating residents
but discussed challenges and suggestions that they had regarding the
scheduling or implementation of the training programs.

## Follow up of residents

We stated that resident participants would be followed up 30 days after
training, if they are in the intervention arms, or 30 days after the
study started, if they are in the control arm, but the intervention
period was three months.

## Data collection from records

We decided to record data from records only for a subset of patients to
reduce the research officers’ workload.

## Selection of units for training

We planned to use simple random sampling to select units if there were
more than two eligible units in a hospital but instead the hospital
principal investigator decided which units to train.

## Timing of resident consent

We had initially planned to ask residents for consent before
randomisation, but the units were only finalised after the hospitals had
been randomised, and residents were therefore approached for consent
afterwards.

## Analysis level of feasibility outcomes

We had planned to analyse feasibility outcomes on both an overall and
individual cluster level, but we only analysed them on an overall level.

# Supplementary material

# References

<span class="csl-left-margin">1. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">GBD 2019 Diseases and Injuries Collaborators.
[Injuries—level 1 cause](). *The Lancet* **396**, (2020).</span>

<span class="csl-left-margin">2. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Mohammad, A. *et al.* [Educational and clinical
impact of advanced trauma life support (ATLS) courses: A systematic
review](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00268-013-2294-0). *World Journal of
Surgery* **38**, 322–329 (2013).</span>

<span class="csl-left-margin">3. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Jayaraman, S. *et al.* [Advanced trauma life
support training for hospital
staff](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.cd004173.pub4). *Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews* (2014).</span>

<span class="csl-left-margin">4. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Kadhum, M. *et al.* [Are primary trauma care
(PTC) courses beneficial in low- and middle-income countries - a
systematic review](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.injury.2019.10.084).
*Injury* **51**, 136–141 (2020).</span>

<span class="csl-left-margin">5. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">American College of Surgeons, C. on T.
*Advanced trauma life support® student course manual*. (American College
of Surgeons, 2018).</span>

<span class="csl-left-margin">6. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Foundation, P. T. C. *Primary trauma care
course manual for trauma management in locations wih limited resources*.
(Primary Trauma Care Foundation, 2018).</span>

<span class="csl-left-margin">7. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Jin, J. *et al.* [Effectiveness of quality
improvement processes, interventions, and structure in trauma systems in
low- and middle-income countries: A systematic review and
meta-analysis](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00268-021-06065-9). *World
Journal of Surgery* **45**, 1982–1998 (2021).</span>

<span class="csl-left-margin">8. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Gerdin Wärnberg, M. *et al.* [A pilot
multicentre cluster randomised trial to compare the effect of trauma
life support training programmes on patient and provider
outcomes](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2021-057504). *BMJ Open*
**12**, e057504 (2022).</span>

<span class="csl-left-margin">9. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Lee, E. C. *et al.* [The statistical
interpretation of pilot trials: Should significance thresholds be
reconsidered?](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2288-14-41) *BMC Medical
Research Methodology* **14**, (2014).</span>

<span class="csl-left-margin">10. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Roberts, I. *et al.* [The CRASH-2 trial: A
randomised controlled trial and economic evaluation of the effects of
tranexamic acid on death, vascular occlusive events and transfusion
requirement in bleeding trauma
patients](https://doi.org/10.3310/hta17100). *Health Technol Assess*
**17**, (2013).</span>

<span class="csl-left-margin">11. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Sierink, J. C. *et al.* [Immediate total-body
CT scanning versus conventional imaging and selective CT scanning in
patients with severe trauma (REACT-2): A randomised controlled
trial](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(16)30932-1). *The Lancet*
**388**, 673–683 (2016).</span>

<span class="csl-left-margin">12. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Ariyanayagam, D. *et al.* The impact of the
ATLS course on traffic accident mortality in trinidad and tobago. *West
Indian Medical Journal* **41**, 72–74 (1992).</span>

<span class="csl-left-margin">13. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Cioè-Peña, E. *et al.* [Development and
implementation of a hospital-based trauma response system in an urban
hospital in san salvador, el
salvador](https://doi.org/10.1177/1460408616672491). *Trauma* **19**,
118–126 (2016).</span>

<span class="csl-left-margin">14. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Petroze, R. T. *et al.* [Can focused trauma
education initiatives reduce mortality or improve resource utilization
in a low-resource setting?](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00268-014-2899-y)
*World Journal of Surgery* **39**, 926–933 (2014).</span>

<span class="csl-left-margin">15. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Van Heng, Y. *et al.* [Non-doctors as trauma
surgeons? A controlled study of trauma training for non-graduate
surgeons in rural cambodia](https://doi.org/10.1017/s1049023x00006282).
*Prehospital and Disaster Medicine* **23**, 483–489 (2008).</span>

<span class="csl-left-margin">16. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Wang, P. *et al.* Comparison of severe trauma
care effect before and after advanced trauma life support training.
*Chinese Journal of Traumatology (English Edition)* **13**, 341–344
(2010).</span>

<span class="csl-left-margin">17. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Ali, J. *et al.* [Teaching effectiveness of the
advanced trauma life support program as demonstrated by an objective
structured clinical examination for practicing
physicians](https://doi.org/10.1007/s002689900171). *World Journal of
Surgery* **20**, 1121–1126 (1996).</span>

<span class="csl-left-margin">18. </span><span
class="csl-right-inline">Ali, J. *et al.* [Comparison of performance of
interns completing the old (1993) and new interactive (1997) advanced
trauma life support
courses](https://doi.org/10.1097/00005373-199901000-00013). *The Journal
of Trauma: Injury, Infection, and Critical Care* **46**, 80–86
(1999).</span>
